So this entire time
we've been very general.
I've been like well I'm gonna
create with the emulators,
I created a Firebase project,
I'm gonna do this.
I wanted to show a very general
workflow of what the Firebase ecosystem
looks like but now you have a good idea
of when we're using what tools and
how we deploy websites and how we connect
out to databases and sign in users.
I wanna get very focused so from here on
out we're going to be very focused on
individual Firebase services and
I wanna start out with a very big one.
This section is all about Firestore.
So Firestore is a NoSQL database with
real time and offline capabilities.
And whenever I teach NoSQL
databases I always am a little bit
hesitant because most developers
come from an SQL background.
And what I've learned is cuz I too came
from an SQL background, is that NoSQL can
be a little bit jarring at first to SQL
developers because they're very different.
And it's not that one is
better than the other,
they're both two totally different tools
that are great for different purposes.
It's that they prioritize
different things.
So what I wanna do to explain Firestore
is I wanna talk about how SQL databases
work at high level and then sort of map
those concepts on to NoSQL databases.
And now just a quick show of hands or
maybe in the chat,
who here comes from
background whether at work or
whether from just learning, that you
primarily use SQL or SQL databases?
Okay, who here is NoSQL databases?
We actually got a good mix here, wow.
When I first started doing this,
that was not the case.
It was about 90 to 100% of people.
So in the SQL world, we have all of our
data formatted and structured in tables.
And with tables we have
two aspects of them.
We have rows and we have columns.
Columns are individual data types.
So first name is a string,
high score here is a number.
And some columns are more important
than others, well all columns are very
important but some are more
significant I would say than others.
And in this case the UID column is
very important because it uniquely
identifies a user and
that is called a primary key.
So having that primary key I can find
a user row which is what we usually
retrieve back into our system and
hydrate into our objects.
Now this is just a table of users but what
if I wanna store data that this user owns?
Well I could go out and
if I'm making an expense tracking app,
I could create a table called TBL expenses
and it has its own primary key of ID.
I can store the cost of the expense,
the category, the date but
then to assign the users ownership of that
record I create another column of UID that
shares or relates that user back to TBL
users, this is known as the foreign key.
And what's great about this is that all
my data, just looking at it, it's nice,
it's squeaky clean, there's null columns,
everything is very well structured.
There's no duplicated data everywhere,
it's highly what we call normalized.
And if I wanna get this data back I just
create this little query where I say,
select these fields from TBL expenses
where the user ID equals this user.
Now one of the things about columns
with SQL is that all columns
must exist on all rows,
you can't have a conditional column.
And so let's say that we're building
this expense tracker app and
there's a new feature that's
gonna come out to it.
And someone says, hey, expenses,
they need to be approved but
not all expenses, only business
expenses have to be approved.
And so we need to store a field
that's shows whether that's the case.
So I could say all right,
let me add an approval column but
if it's true the expense
has been approved,
if it's false it's been not approved.
But what do I do about the cases
where it's a personal expense and
it doesn't have to be approved?
Well I guess I can make it nullable so
it doesn't apply to those categories.
But now I'm I kind of in
a situation I don't like because
this column type is Boolean but
it has three states.
It has true, false and null and
if the a column has three
states is it really a Boolean?
Is a nullable Boolean still a Boolean?
True, false and null, I don't know.
Those are the kinda questions that
I think keep you up at night.
So maybe I wanna rethink my data
structure differently and I say okay,
well what if we go and let's just create
another table called TBL business
expenses, and then that has an approval
table and TBL expenses doesn't.
And now if someone says get me
all of the expenses together,
I can write a query for that.
And I say okay,
let me select the ID, the cost,
the UID from the TBL expenses,
from this user and
then let me union it from the business
expenses and so this all comes back.
But now as my data model changes I
might end up having to do more and
more things like this.
And so the pro here is that the data
integrity I have is really high.
As long as I keep my data normalized,
as long as I keep structuring
everything out that way,
all my columns they make sense, I can be
very sure of the data that's in there.
But some of the cons are is that as
the data model grows our queries
become more complex and the more
complex of a query is the harder it
becomes to scale that query and
get it to respond in a very fast nature.
And these highly normalized
data structures can
lead us into writing slower queries.
And to scale this up traditionally,
in SQL databases you have to scale
what is referred to as vertically.
So the two sort of main ideas or
methodologies of scaling within Cloud
computing is you have vertically
scaling and horizontally scaling.
Vertically scaling is when you say okay,
on SQL databases I'm going to
just get a bigger better machine.
I actually am not a hardware person so
I don't know if they're bigger per say but
they're more expensive,
they're more powerful machines and
so as my dataset grows,
as my queries need to become more powerful
I need to get better machines to scale up.
Whereas with NoSQL data bases
the data model is different.
The way the database forms
is a lot different so
I can actually scale what is
referred as to horizontally.
And this means that instead
of getting bigger, better,
faster machines I can just
get more machines in general.
I can just reproduce my data
across multiple machines and
the way that Cloud providers works and
specifically to with Cloud Firestore is
that scaling up happens kind of
just completely transparent to you.
Is that you are just getting data and
maybe you are spiking through a ton
of traffic or your data is
growing at an incredible rate.
Well in the background it's
horizontally scaling for you and
you don't have to make
any of those decisions.
So when it comes to looking
at SQL verse NoSQL is that
in the NoSQL world is that we prioritize
reading data over writing data.
So we prioritize getting a very very fast
read from the database, rather than making
sure that all of our data is written
in a very great and normalized format.
And to think about this go think
about the top five apps that you use
on your phone and how often would
you say that you consume content
from those apps versus enter
in data into those apps.
So think about any social media app,
how often are you scrolling and
seeing every post versus how many times
are you actually posting yourself or
even just entering a like on the post or
something that?
It's usually magnitudes higher
that we are consuming, so
reading the content from any given system
than we are actually writing data into it.
So as we go through this section
we're going to move away from but
not entirely forget
the principles of normalization,
having high integrity but
rigid models and even things like joints.
And what we're going to get out of it in
return is we're gonna get fast queries,
denormalization, we're gonna
learn some principles of that.
And then all of our queries that we're
going to operate are all gonna work in
real time.
So we saw how data is
structured in SQL databases,
how is it structured in Firestore?
Everything in Firestore
is done with hierarchy.
We have collection, document,
collection, document and
it all flows down a tree like that.
You can't store documents at the top
level, everything starts with collections.
So if we think about tables,
while we always move from tables to
collections they're not
exactly the same but
we can kind of think about
them in that same idea.
So in this case we have
an expenses collection and
then within here we have two
documents with generated IDs.
And the documents have IDs and
we can think about them as primary keys.
And within there we have data which
is sort of in this object format and
this is the cost UID category, we refer
to these as fields instead of columns.
And what we noticed here is that in the
case of our business expenses versus our
regular expenses is that I can actually
say approved true on the second document
rather than on the first document and
that's fine.
Documents do not have to conform to any
type of schema, column format or anything.
You could have a collection
called grab bag and
every single document could follow
a completely different schema and
different structure entirely, there's
nothing stopping you from doing that.
There are ways which we'll see what
security rules, to actually enforce that
documents do follow a certain structure
and data types but at the database level
there's nothing preventing you from just
putting whatever data structure you want.
So you have total flexibility now and
you don't have to worry about
adhering to different columns
as your data model grows.
And then as far as thinking about data and
rows and
a table, while rows are individual
documents within the table.
So we have this document ID and
then all that document data and
just like with columns in SQL is that all
of our fields can have complex types.
It's not just JSON,
it's not just strings and numbers and
Boolean, you can store timestamps and
geo coordinates and
binary data and lots of complex
types inside of a Firestore document